Order: 1
Description: A document is a combination of content and metadata that conveys information through the framework.
---
A *document* is a combination of *content* and *[metadata](/framework/concepts/metadata)* as it makes it's way through the system. The content of a document is what most [modules](/framework/concepts/modules) manipulate and is what you'll presumably output to disk at the end of the [pipeline](/framework/concepts/pipelines). Documents are immutable and once a value is added to the metadata by one module, it can never be removed by a subsequent one (though it can be overwritten by a cloned document). Though the documentation often talks about documents being "transformed" or "manipulated" by modules, this isn't strictly accurate. Instead modules return a new cloned copy of the document with different content and/or additional metadata, while maintaining all the metadata the original document had.

For example, this visualizes a single document that contains some content as well as two metadata values:

<div class="mermaid">
    graph TD
        subgraph Document
            subgraph Metadata
                Title
                Published
            end
            Content
        end
</div>

It's tempting to think of documents as being one-to-one with files in the filesystem, but they're much more than that. While files are often the primary way documents are created, they can come from other sources too. It's better to think of documents and being part of a database. In this mode of thought Statiq is like a document database, with Statiq documents being analogous to the document concept from other document databases.

# Creating and Cloning Documents

There are two ways to get a new document: you can create one from scratch or you can clone an existing one.

To create a document you typically call one of the `CreateDocument()` method overloads on the current [execution context](/framework/concepts/execution#execution-context). These methods let you provide the initial metadata and/or content that the new document should contain.

To clone an existing document and replace or add new content and/or metadata you can call one of the `Clone()` methods on the document itself. If you're unsure whether you have a null document, the execution context also provides several `CloneOrCreateDocument()` overloads that either clones an existing document or creates a new one depending on if the provided document reference is null or not.

# Document Properties

In addition to metadata, every document has a few fundamental properties.

## Document ID

Every document has an `Id` property. This is a `Guid` that uniquely identifies the document within a given execution. Once a document is created every cloned copy of that document, regardless of whether the content or metadata is changed, will have the same ID. This lets you identify the "same" document even after it's been cloned a number of times.

## Source and Destination

All documents have two properties that relate to file location: `Source` and `Destination`. `Source` is an absolute path and indicates where on disk the document came from (assuming it came from disk). `Destination` is a relative path and indicates where in the output folder the document should be written. Not all documents are intended for output (some are just for conveying data), so not all documents will have a source or destination property.

## Content Provider

The content of a document is accessed through a content provider (an instance of `IContentProvider`). This lets the framework control access to content and ensures a consistent experience regardless of content source. You should provide a content provider when creating or cloning a document if you want to set it's content. The most common way of getting a content provider for a particular type of content (such as a `string` or a `Stream`) is to call one of the `GetContentProvider()` methods from the current [execution context](/framework/concepts/execution#execution-context).

# Accessing Documents

During execution you can access all the documents generated by each pipeline using the `IPipelineOutputs` interface, which is available via the `Outputs` property of the current [execution context](/framework/concepts/execution#execution-context). You can also access documents generated by a given pipeline using various modules such as `ConcatDocuments` which are useful when setting up multi-pipeline document flows.
